EasyPart: An Effective and Comprehensive Hypergraph Partitioner for FPGA-based Emulation

Abstract
Logic verification becomes more and more important for the design of large-scale digital integrated circuits (ICs). This makes FPGA-based hardware emulation an imperative step in the design flow, and how to effectively partition and map the circuit netlist into the multi-FPGA system (MFS) for emulation is of concern. In this paper, we present EasyPart, an effective and comprehensive hypergraph partitioner for the FPGA-based hardware emulation. EasyPart can handle the practical constraints in the MFS for logic emulation and includes novel techniques for pursuing minimum hop during topology-driven partitioning and treating the interconnection constraints. We have evaluated EasyPart against state-of-the-art partitioners on public benchmarks. The results show that EasyPart can reduce the cutsize with a comparable or shorter runtime. EasyPart is capable of finding non-hop solutions with better robustness and performance compared to previous work. It also achieves significant improvements in terms of time division multiplexing (TDM) ratio and maximum hop when tested on industrial cases.

Introduction
Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) play a crucial role in the logic verification of digital integrated circuits (ICs), providing a flexible and efficient platform for validating and testing IC designs before fabrication. Because the capacity of a single FPGA is relatively limited, a large design usually needs to be partitioned into many subcircuits before it can be mapped into a multi-FPGA system (MFS) for logic emulation which largely accelerates the procedure of logic verification. The logic netlist of the design can be well described by a hypergraph with cell/gate denoted by graph vertex and interconnect net denoted by hyperedge. Therefore, a hypergraph partitioner is imperative to the MFS for logic emulation.
However, computing the optimal partition for a hypergraph is a well-known NP-hard problem [11,15], for which many heuristic algorithms have been proposed. hMETIS [12], along with other partitioners such as PaToH [7], employs a multilevel paradigm for hypergraph partitioning, which is a three-phase workflow composed of coarsening, initial partitioning, and refinement phases. KaHyPar [19] further improves the partition quality by utilizing a highly localized local search with flow-based techniques. HyperSF [2] and HyperEF [1] use spectral methods to replace the coarsening phase, achieving more efficiency without losing the key structural properties of the original hypergraph. SpecPart [5,6] is a spectral-based partitioner that can produce embeddings of vertices and improve the quality of partition. These hypergraph partitioners focus on minimizing the cutsize, which depicts how many netlists are partitioned across different FPGAs. While for the FPGA-based emulation, the definition of cutsize should reflect more information regarding the actual connective structure among FPGAs, because it further influences the total delay and clock frequency, which is crucial for logic emulation.
Furthermore, the logic partitioning for MFS enforces more constraints that may not be considered in a typical hypergraph partitioner. These constraints include the multi-dimensional balance constraint, the fixed vertex constraint, the grouping constraint, the interconnect constraint, the topology constraint, etc. The recently proposed TritonPart [4] is an open-source partitioner that can handle multiple constraints, but it does not consider the interconnection constraint and the topology constraint. TopoPart [24] is the first work that focuses on the topology constraint, which pursues non-hop solutions by calculating the feasible FPGAs that each cell/gate can be assigned. Li et al. [16,17] improved TopoPart and proposed a simple method to find the most beneficial moves during the refinement phase to alleviate the interconnection imbalance. However, all the existing methods are not practical or effective enough to handle all the MFS constraints for logic emulation.

Table 1: Comparison of different hypergraph partitioners.

Constraints for FPGA-based emulation
hMETIS [12] PaToH [7] KaHyPar [19] TritonPart [4] Li et al. [16,17] EasyPart (ours)
In Table 1, we list the capabilities of main hypergraph partitioners regarding the treatment of practical constraints in FPGA-based emulation. From it, we can see that most of the existing works do not consider the grouping and interconnection/topology constraints of the MFS. In this work, we present an effective and comprehensive hypergraph partitioner, named EasyPart, which considers all these constraints in the FPGA-based emulation. Our main contributions are as follows.
• We present an effective hypergraph partitioning engine based on a practical objective function of cutsize for logic partitioning [3], which reflects the direction of signal flow between FPGAs. Experiments show that our partitioning engine can reduce the cutsize compared to the state-of-the-art partitioners (hMETIS [12], TritonPart [4]) with comparable or better runtime, on the Titan23 benchmark suite [18]. • We propose an enhanced topology-driven initial partitioning algorithm that can find non-hop solutions under the topology constraint, and minimize the maximum hop of routing paths between FPGAs if no feasible solution exists. It achieves the same or better performance than the best existing method [17] with more robustness. • We adapt the whole multi-level partitioning process by keeping and considering the direction of signal flow between FPGAs to handle the interconnection/topology constraint. A comprehensive gain function to evaluate the benefit of vertex moves in the refinement phase is proposed. The experiments on industrial cases demonstrate that with the proposed approaches, the time division multiplexing (TDM) ratio and the maximum hop of routing paths can be significantly reduced. • With the above contributions, we have developed an effective and comprehensive hypergraph partitioning framework, named EasyPart, considering the practical constraints for large-scale logic emulation with MFS.

Preliminaries 2.1 Problem Formulation of Hypergraph Partitioning
Table 2 provides a list of important terminologies and notations used throughout this paper. In a hypergraph 𝐺 (𝑉 , 𝐸), each hyperedge can connect more than two vertices. The basic objective of the hypergraph partitioning is to divide the vertices into 𝐾 blocks 𝑉 1 , 𝑉 2 , • • • , 𝑉 𝐾 , such that the sum of weights of the hyperedges that connect vertices from different blocks is minimized, while satisfying the balance constraint:
(
Here 𝑤 (𝑣) denotes the weight of vertex 𝑣, and 𝜖 is a user-defined tolerance depicting in what degree the hypergraph is not partitioned into 𝐾 equal-size parts [12]. Although most existing hypergraph partitioners consider the constraint (1), KaHyPar [16] only considers the upper bound in the inequality. Notice that a simple assumption is that the weight of every hyperedge is 1, and the optimization objective of the above problem is called 𝑐𝑢𝑡. The problem is sometimes referred to as a min-cut optimization problem.

Considerations in FPGA-based Emulation
For FPGA-based emulation, there should be more considerations of constraints than the above basic hypergraph partitioning problem. Therefore, the 𝑐𝑢𝑡 in the last subsection is very simplified and more meaningful cutsize definitions are needed.

Cutsize Definitions.
Differently from the simplest cutsize definition cut (equals the sum of weights of the cut hyperedges), another definition multiplies the weight of each cut hyperedge by the number of its connected partitions before adding them up, which leads to the cutsize metric named sum-of-external-degrees (soed) in [22]. While considering the logic partition problem, one should be aware that each hyperedge corresponds to a signal net which has a unique source node and maybe multiple drain nodes. Thus, neither the original 𝑐𝑢𝑡 nor soed reflects the nature of a signal flow. In this work, we use the following definition of cutsize for cut hyperedge 𝑒:
where 𝐷 (𝑒) and 𝑆 (𝑒) denote the sets of FPGAs containing the drain nodes and the source node corresponding to hyperedge 𝑒, respectively. "\" denotes the substraction of set, and "| • |" denotes the cardinality of set. The objective function in the hypergraph partitioning problem for FPGA-based emulation is the sum of cutsize for cut hyperedges, which also equals to the connectivity metric [9] or the (𝐾 -1) metric [3]. Furthermore, for the 𝐾-way partitioning problem for MFS, the cutsize between two blocks (FPGAs) can be defined:
With it, one obtains a 𝐾 × 𝐾 cut matrix 𝐶. It is easy to prove:
where 𝑐𝑢𝑡 denotes the simplest cutsize definition in the last subsection. Notice that (4) is the cutsize metric considered in this work, which is relatively close to the 𝑠𝑜𝑒𝑑 metric.

Multiple Constraints.
As shown in Table 1, some partitioners only consider the single-dimensional balance constraint. This is not adequate for the problem of FPGA-based emulation, because there are multiple types of resources in an FPGA. So, the multidimensional balance constraint should be considered. This is realized by simply changing 𝑤 (𝑣) in (1) to a vector
where 𝑚 is the number of resource types. Besides, in some settings, certain circuit cell/gate must be assigned to a specific FPGA for debugging or other reasons. This is called fixed vertex constraint in hypergraph partitioning problem, and can be easily handled by forcing the partition result of this kind of vertices to their specific FPGAs and ignoring their placement in the partitioning process.
There is another constraint called grouping constraint, as some cells/gates in the circuit are closely related to each other, and it is recommended or even forced to assign them to the same FPGA. To meet this requirement, one can merge the related vertices into a super vertex and treat it as a single vertex in the partitioning process.
For the practical MFS for logic emulation, there are more complex constraints regarding the interconnection among FPGAs, e.g., limited interconnection wires exist among FPGAs. So, if the cutsize between two FPGAs exceeds the number of connection wires, TDM has to be used to resolve the congestion but leads to a larger signal delay. Moreover, some FPGA pairs may not have any wire connection in between (a special interconnect constraint). Simply ignoring this fact will lead to unavoidable routing after partitioning, which often results in longer signal paths with hops on intermediate FPGAs. These two constraints are referred to as the interconnection constraint and the topology constraint respectively.

Interconnection-aware and Topology-driven Partitioning
If the partitioning algorithm does not consider the interconnection constraint among different FPGA pairs, it often causes a higher TDM ratio between some FPGAs [20], and thus larger maximum signal delay. To alleviate this problem, [16] defines a score function to reflect the imbalance degree of TDM usage and try to reduce the maximum TDM ratio during the refinement phase. Its drawback is that it overlooks the potential opportunities in other phases and does not fully exploit the advantages of the multilevel paradigm.
TopoPart [24] is the first work of hypergraph partitioning that focuses on topology constraint, aiming to find a non-hop solution. It solves the problem with a necessary and sufficient condition for feasible solutions and calculates the candidate set that contains all the available blocks for each vertex. [17] improves TopoPart by introducing a more effective candidate set updating method. However, both algorithms ignore the importance of the relative size of vertex degree in MFS when choosing the best block, and do not handle the partitioning problem well when there is no feasible solution.

Proposed Method
In this section, we present the proposed EasyPart framework for the K-way partitioning problem in FPGA-based emulation, whose flowchart is shown in Fig. 1. EasyPart includes an effective hypergraph partitioning engine that can achieve high-quality partitioning when there is no interconnection or topology constraint (Section 3.1). When the interconnection/topology constraint is considered, Easy-Part can handle it by making adaptations to the whole partitioning process (Section 3.2). Moreover, if the topology constraint exists, EasyPart utilizes a novel topology-driven initial partitioning algorithm to find a solution with minimum hop (Section 3.3). Notice that some techniques in the hypergraph partitioning engine are also applied if possible, when EasyPart handles the situation with interconnection/topology constraint.

An Effective Hypergraph Partitioning Engine
EasyPart reads in a hierarchical circuit netlist. Before performing the hypergraph partitioning, a step of hypergraph modeling using a top-down adaptive flattening approach is developed (as shown in Fig. 1). It identifies when to flatten based on the resource ratio and net density of each cell. The hierarchical design can be modeled as a hierarchical tree. Fig. 2 shows an abstract description of a part of the hierarchical design and Fig. 3(a) shows the corresponding hierarchical tree of cells. After adaptive flattening, the partially flattened design is transformed into a hypergraph to depict the cell-net relationship. Take the hierarchical design in Fig. 2 as an example. If during the adaptive flattening, cell a is flattened by one level and cells b and c are not flattened, the result of hypergraph modeling leads to the hypergraph shown in Fig. 3(b). The top-down adaptive flattening approach preserves some hierarchical structures from human designers to benefit the final quality of logic partition, while avoiding a long time for hypergraph modeling and the largest hypergraph from complete flattening fed into the subsequent partitioner. This is also helpful for debugging and analysis of the design.
Our partitioning engine consists of the following five steps.

Coarsening.
In the coarsening phase, we use the first-choice (FC) scheme [14], which merges vertices 𝑢 and 𝑣 with higher connectivity, measured by the heavy-edge function:
Large hyperedges are skipped to speed up the calculation of the heavy-edge functions. During the clustering process, we do not restrict the number of vertices to be merged into a super node unless their resource requirements reach a certain limit. We allow different vertex traversing orders, including random order, degree order, and weight order, to produce various partitioning results. If there are ties, we break them by favoring uncoarsened vertices. The time to stop each round of coarsening is determined by a given coarsening ratio factor. After merging the vertices, we merge parallel hyperedges and remove single-vertex hyperedges by using a fast hash function in [19] to reduce |𝐸| and the number of (𝑢, 𝑣) pairs in (5), thus reducing the complexity of the algorithm. Because the value of cutsize is not influenced by the connection of vertices within each hyperedge, we do not care about the order of vertices during the merging process if interconnection/topology constraint is not considered.

Initial
Partitioning. When the balance constraint only considers the upper bound, we use the greedy growing partitioning [13] to get a relatively good initial solution. If no fixed vertices are given, we start from the one with the smallest degree and use shortest path algorithms to find the furthermost vertices until each FPGA has at least one assigned node. For the balance constraint with both upper and lower bounds, we simply use random partitioning to assign each FPGA with one node alternately. After the initial partitioning, we use techniques in the following refinement phase to reduce the cutsize as much as possible. Keeping only one solution may lead to fluctuating results, and the best initial result does not guarantee the best final result. So, we keep multiple solutions and pass them all to the refinement phase like hMETIS [12].

Refinement.
After different initial solutions are given, we refine them in parallel. At each level, we use different refinement methods to improve the partition quality, and partitions with cutsize 10% worse than the best solution are removed to save time [12]. The most common refinement method is the Fiduccia-Mattheyses (FM) algorithm [10], which is a local search algorithm that iteratively moves vertices between partitions to reduce cutsize. Here we choose the K-way pairwise FM (PM) algorithm to achieve better performance [8].
After that, we run iterations of greedy K-way refinement [14], which produce high-quality partitions while consuming limited time. Both methods use the definition of cutsize (4) to evaluate the benefit of moves. Because calculating gains of vertex moves and updating priority queues are closely related to |𝐸| and |𝑒 |, we also skip large hyperedges just as in the coarsening phase. Unlike the previous methods that only save the best partition result at the last level, we keep all the remained solutions and pass them to the next step.

Cut-Overlay Clustering and Partitioning (COCP).
After running the multilevel partitioning several times and generating a series of candidate solutions, we apply the COCP, a technique to further improve the solution by combining information from all candidates [6].

V-Cycle
Refinement. Lastly, we apply the V-cycle refinement to further improve the prior solution [12]. The multilevel partitioning will be performed several times. In the coarsening phase, the prior solution is used as a community constraint. Then the initial partitioning phase generates multiple solutions, and the prior solution is also kept as an initial solution. Finally, the refinement phase returns the best partitioning result.

Treatment of Interconnection/Topology Constraint
To handle the interconnection/topology constraint based on the engine above, we should make adaptations to all three main phases of the partitioning process, as follows.

Coarsening
. Because now we have to consider the exact cutsize between FPGAs instead of just the sum, we can only merge hyperedges with the same source node and drain nodes. However, the original merging process is unaware of the vertex order in each hyperedge. To solve this problem, we keep the source node and sort the drain nodes in each net, before using the hash function to merge them in an order-sensitive way.

Initial
Partitioning. Instead of judging whether to keep an initial solution or not just based on the cutsize, we now change the criterion to the TDM ratio, except when the topology constraint exists. If the topology constraint exits, we use the initial partitioning method described in Section 3.3. We also try to remap the FPGAs to get a better result when the interconnection resources between the FPGAs are not unified, because the partition result of the initial partitioning may not be optimized under the TDM ratio and routing cost. Therefore, we search for a K-element permutation 𝑃 to reduce them, and then reassign each node 𝑣 from 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡 (𝑣) to 𝑃 (𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡 (𝑣)).
During the process, the total cutsize remains unchanged. We use different heuristic methods to search for a better solution, including pairwise exchange and simulated annealing.

3.2.3
Refinement. This is the most important phase in handling the interconnection constraint, and we present an in-depth treatment to improve partitioning quality. First, we should restore all the large hyperedges since they now may lead to the use of unnecessary TDM in some corner cases. Because we use the PM algorithm which starts from the FPGA pairs that have the largest cutsize in between [8], we also change the criterion to the TDM ratio. This criterion goes the same when dropping the bad solutions at each refinement level.
When choosing the best vertices to move in different refinement methods, a vertex gain function will be defined to evaluate the benefit, originally only considering the cutsize. Now we consider the cutsize with the interconnection constraint together. The pseudocode of our interconnection-aware vertex gain function is shown in Algorithm 1. From lines 5 to 10, we calculate the cutsize gain of the vertex move, changing the source and drain nodes if necessary. From lines 12 to 23, we separately calculate the gain on interconnection and topology constraint. We traverse all the FPGA pairs: (a) if they are connected, we calculate the TDM ratio and multiply it by the interconnection violations (lines 20-21); (b) if they are not connected, we estimate the routing cost by multiplying the cutsize between them by their distance, and check whether the move leads to more topology violations (lines 17-18).
When we get a feasible solution under the topology constraint, no more topology violations should be allowed. So, if the vertex move causes more topology violations (routing distance exceeds the maximum allowed hop), it will have the least priority in the refinement process (lines 24-25). Otherwise, for the interconnection constraint, we set its weight factor to a variable 𝜏 that changes with the refinement level. At the beginning, we set 𝜏 to 0, and increase it by 1 in the next level. The reason for this is that at higher levels, moves of vertices often cause great changes in cutsize, and it is hard to refine it back if we place too much emphasis on the interconnection constraint. At the last few levels of the refinement phase, we can mainly focus on reducing the interconnection violations and TDM ratio, because we suppose the initial partitioning phase will not get

Algorithm 1 Interconnection-aware vertex gain function
Input: An initial partition, Vertex 𝑣 𝑖 , FPGAs v𝑓 and v𝑡 Output: The gain of moving 𝑣 𝑖 from v𝑓 to v𝑡 1: 𝑐𝑢𝑡 1 ← 0, 𝑐𝑢𝑡 2 ← 0 ⊲ cutsizes related to 𝑣 𝑖 ⊲ initialize the cutsizes related to 𝑣 𝑖 between FPGAs 2: for each ( v𝑖 , v 𝑗 ) ∈ V × V , 𝑖 < 𝑗 do 3: During the calculation of the gain function, we need two global variables: the cut matrix 𝐶 and the interconnection resource matrix 𝐼𝑂. The latter will not change throughout the partitioning process, but the former will change constantly after each move. Since recalculating the cut matrix may lead to changes in the gain function of every vertex, we only update the cut matrix after a single round of the PM process to reduce time. For the greedy K-way refinement, we do the update right after each move. We assume that this lazy update will not affect the final result too much, and if it does, the greedy K-way refinement will correct it to a certain extent.

Min-hop Topology-driven Initial Partitioning
The topology constraint is a special case of interconnection constraint, where the interconnection resources between FPGAs are limited to 0. Therefore, modifications should also be applied to the whole process of partitioning as in the previous subsection to maintain the direction of signal flow in the original netlist. The main difference is that we need to calculate the candidate set 𝑐𝑑𝑑𝑡 beforehand and replace the initial partitioning algorithm with a topology-driven one, which will be discussed as follows.
The initial partitioning algorithms in [17,24] can find a non-hop solution without topology violations effectively if the solution exists, but have the following drawbacks. Firstly, they only consider the cutsize when choosing FPGAs, but ignore the importance of its vertex degree, i.e. the number of its neighbors. Another problem is that if the algorithm fails at the coarsest level, it will either report no solution [24] or give a solution with minimum violation [17], giving up the opportunity to find better solutions at upper levels. Besides, it is often difficult to find a non-hop solution when the topology of MFS is quite complicated. So, it is necessary to relax the non-hop constraint in the partitioning process. In our approach, we first do the candidate FPGA propagation as [24], and ensure the size of each cluster vertex is no less than a threshold 𝛽. Then, we transform the hypergraph into a simple graph, where each hyperedge 𝑒 is transformed into |𝑒 | -1 edges from the source node to the drain nodes, and run the min-hop topology-driven initial partitioning algorithm as Algorithm 2. We try to find a solution with the maximum hop no more than a given threshold 𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤_ℎ𝑜𝑝. If we cannot find a solution, we will continue tracing back to the less coarsened graph until we find one. Otherwise, we will search with a larger 𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤_ℎ𝑜𝑝. 𝐹 ← ∅ ⊲ failed nodes that has no available FPGA end if 26: end for During each iteration of Algorithm 2, when selecting the order to iterate vertices, we first sort them by the size of 𝑐𝑑𝑑𝑡 in ascending order, and break ties by favoring vertices with higher degrees. When choosing the best FPGA for a node, we first sort them by the number of its neighbors in descending order, and break ties by favoring FPGAs with smaller cutsize increments. After assigning 𝑣 to 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡 (𝑣), we do the propagation like [17], but with a slack ℎ (lines [16][17], updating 𝑐𝑑𝑑𝑡 of each necessary vertex 𝑢 using the inequality: 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 ( û, 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡 (𝑣)) ≤ 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 (𝑢, 𝑣) +ℎ, ∀ û ∈ 𝑐𝑑𝑑𝑡 (𝑢). When 𝑐𝑑𝑑𝑡 of a node becomes empty due to insufficient resources or topology violation, we mark these nodes as failed nodes 𝐹 and temporarily skip them (lines [13][14]. If failed nodes exist, we recalculate 𝑐𝑑𝑑𝑡 of each failed node with slack ℎ + 1 according to the assigned nodes and remaining resources, and continue with the next iteration.

Algorithm 2 Min-hop topology-driven initial partitioning
If the non-hop solution cannot be found, a solution with violations will be given. The refinement methods will help find hidden opportunities for feasible solutions, but if the violations still exist after refinement, the inter-FPGA routing is executed to pass signals between FPGA pairs that are not directly connected. That is the main reason for our target of minimizing the hop. For each hyperedge cut that violates the topology of MFS, we start from the source node and find the shortest paths to all the drain nodes. To balance the load on MFS edges, we use an algorithm similar to [25]. We assign every MFS edge a cost, which is positively correlated to the number of nets that go through the MFS edge and is dynamically adjusted during the whole routing process.

Experimental Results
In this section, we present the experimental results with the Titan23 benchmark suite [18] and actual industrial designs to validate the proposed techniques. The statistics of these test cases are listed in Table 3, where those of the industrial cases are obtained after the hypergraph modeling phase of EasyPart. Each industry case requires 26 different types of resources. The proposed techniques and EasyPart are compared with hMETIS, TritonPart, and the approach in [17]. The proposed techniques are implemented in C++. All the experiments are carried out on a Linux server with AMD EPYC 7V12 64-Core CPU and 512GB memory.

Results on the Basic Hypergraph Partitioning
We first validate the effectiveness of the hypergraph partitioning engine in EasyPart. It is compared with two state-of-the-art hypergraph partitioners: hMETIS 2.0pre1 version1 and TritonPart2, on Titan23 benchmarks. Because the two partitioners consider both the upper and lower bounds of the balance constraint, we change the constraint of our engine to align with them. The imbalance factor 𝜖 is set to 5% and the number of FPGAs 𝐾 is set to 4. The compared hMETIS supports 64-bit architectures, direct K-way partition, and has more stable performance. It runs with default parameters: nruns = 10, ptype = kway, ctype = h1, rtype = krandom, cmaxnet = 50, rmaxnet = 50, nvcycles = 1, seed = 0. otype = soed is set so that its objective function becomes similar to our setting. For TritonPart, we set the seed = 0 and all other parameter settings as default. CPLEX3 is used as the primary ILP solver to keep the same as [4].
The results of the cutsize and runtime comparisons are listed in Table 4. For hMETIS and TritonPart, the values in the cutsize column are recalculated using (4). From the table, we can see that if we set hMETIS as the baseline, TritonPart achieves a cutsize that is on average 3% smaller, and EasyPart achieves a cutsize 14% smaller. For most cases, EasyPart achieves the best cutsize. This validates the effectiveness of our hypergraph partitioning engine which is presented in Section 3.1. Regarding the runtime, EasyPart is 2.69× slower than hMETIS, but still 22× faster than TritonPart. This is partially due to the support of multiple constraints in EasyPart, which makes it run slower than hMETIS. TritonPart runs very slowly in 1http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/views/metis 2We obtain the source code from https://github.com/ABKGroup/TritonPart. 3https://www.ibm.com/analytics/cplex-optimizer

Validating the Proposed Topology-driven Partitioning Approach on Non-hop Setting
To compare the approaches for topology-driven partitioning fairly, we use the fixed nodes and MFS topology [21] the same as TopoPart and [17], for the Titan23 benchmark suite. The original 𝑛-pin nets are transformed into (𝑛 -1) two-pin nets and the balance factor is ignored. For the hyperparameter 𝛽, TopoPart sets its default value as 2𝐾 3 , while [17] sets it as 𝐾 3 because it eliminates all the violated status and therefore can have a more strict constraint. Here, we conduct an empirical study on the impact of 𝛽 on the partitioning results. We set 𝛽 from 𝐾 3 to 2𝐾 3 , namely 3, 4 and 5 in this case since 𝐾 = 8. Because [17] is the enhanced version of TopoPart, we only implement [17] as the baseline with all the default settings. We set the maximum allowed hop of our algorithm to 0, forcing it to get a nonhop solution. Table 5 shows the cutsize of the partitions produced by [17] and our algorithm across all test cases under different 𝛽 values. There is no significant difference in the runtime between the two algorithms so we do not list it in the table.
Both algorithms successfully get non-hop solutions for all 22 cases under different 𝛽 values. The results of [17] when 𝛽 = 3 are overall smaller than those in its original paper due to different coarsening and refinement methods. From the results, we can see that our approach achieves approximately the same results as [17] when 𝛽 = 3. But when 𝛽 increases, the cutsize of our algorithm is relatively steady and even achieves significant improvements in many cases, while the cutsize of [17] is quite sensitive to 𝛽 and has a large fluctuation in some cases, like sparcT2_core, sparcT1_chip2 and bitcoin_miner.
The reasons for the above results are as follows. The selection of 𝛽 is a trade-off between efficiency and quality [24]. Therefore, if 𝛽 is relatively small, the coarsest hypergraph will have fewer vertices, resulting in less computation but smaller searching space, and often suboptimal solution (or even no solution). In contrast, if 𝛽 is relatively large, the search space will be larger, along with more computation. For example, sparcT2_core is clustered into 134 vertices when 𝛽 = 3, but 128255 vertices when 𝛽 = 5. Both TopoPart and [17] only consider the size of 𝑐𝑑𝑑𝑡 and cutsize during the initial partitioning but ignore the effect of the number of neighbors of FPGA. Aiming for a smaller cutsize may lead to assigning a node to a marginal FPGA, which causes an unintended future increase of cutsize due to the lack of enough tracebacks. This phenomenon more likely happens when the number of vertices is quite large. For a complex MFS topology, it is very hard to find a solution at a high coarsening level. So, returning to lower levels and dealing with a large hypergraph is often unavoidable. All these reveal that our algorithm is more suitable for the non-hop topology-driven partitioning problem.

Validating EasyPart with Industrial Cases
Interconnection and topology constraints are common in actual MFS. To validate the proposed EasyPart, we carry out experiments on an industrial MFS topology as shown in Fig. 4, with the interconnection between two FPGAs all set to 20. We use EasyPart to partition four actual designs from our industrial partner on this MFS. If completely flattened, these designs include up to 63 million cells. The numbers of cells and nets after the adaptive flattening for the following experiments of partitioning are listed in Table 3.
We first run EasyPart without considering the interconnection/topology constraint. Then, we run it in a mode only considering the interconnection constraint, and finally run it in the mode considering both the two constraints. EasyPart cannot find a non-hop solution on this MFS for the four industrial designs. So, the necessary routing as described in Section 3.3 is added. Before routing, we count the cutsize and topology violations of the partitioning result. After routing, we count the maximum and average TDM ratio, and the maximum hop of routing paths, which are the main metrics to evaluate the quality of interconnection-aware and topology-driven partitioning. The results are listed in Table 6. Notice that the partitions with smaller TDM ratios and smaller maximum hops have better performances of FPGA-based emulation [23].
From Table 6, we can see that before the routing, although the original partitioning solutions have a relatively small cutsize, they have a large number of topology violations. If the interconnection constraint is considered during the partition, the violations are largely reduced at the cost of some unavoidable cutsize increments. This becomes more obvious when we run EasyPart in full mode which also considers topology constraint at the early stage of partitioning. After the routing, all these topology violations are removed with each running mode of EasyPart. If comparing the three modes, we can see that if both constraints are considered, EasyPart produces the results with the smallest TDM ratios and the smallest maximum hops. This validates the effectiveness of the proposed techniques. We also list the runtimes of EasyPart in full mode in Table 7, including the runtimes for hypergraph modeling and hypergraph partitioning respectively. From it, we can see the efficiency of EasyPart, which costs no more than 23 minutes to deliver a high-quality partition for the industrial case with up to 63 million flattened cells.

Conclusions
In this work, we introduce the constraints-driven circuit netlist hypergraph partitioning problem for FPGA-based logic emulation and present an effective and comprehensive partitioner, EasyPart. Adaptations are made in the multilevel partitioning paradigm to optimize it under this setting with considerations of multiple constraints. We also propose a min-hop initial partitioning algorithm to handle the topology constraint, and a detailed treatment to improve the quality of the partitioning solution under the interconnection constraint.
Extensive experimental results show that EasyPart can largely reduce the cutsize compared to the leading partitioners. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of EasyPart in handling the topology and interconnection constraints, achieving better partitioning results with more robustness compared to previous work, and significant improvements in TDM ratio and maximum hop when testing on industrial cases.

References
Hyperef: Spectral hypergraph coarsening by effective-resistance clustering Ali Aghdaei Zhuo Feng Proceedings of the 41st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design the 41st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design 2022
Hypersf: Spectral hypergraph coarsening via flow-based local clustering Ali Aghdaei Zhiqiang Zhao Zhuo Feng IEEE/ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design (ICCAD). IEEE 2021. 2021
Recent directions in netlist partitioning: A survey J Charles Andrew B Alpert Kahng Integration 19 1-2 1995. 1995
An Open-Source Constraints-Driven General Partitioning Multi-Tool for VLSI Physical Design Ismail Bustany Grigor Gasparyan Andrew B Kahng Ioannis Koutis Bodhisatta Pramanik Zhiang Wang IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer Aided Design (ICCAD) IEEE 2023. 2023
SpecPart: A supervised spectral framework for hypergraph partitioning solution improvement Ismail Bustany Andrew B Kahng Ioannis Koutis Bodhisatta Pramanik Zhiang Wang Proceedings of the 41st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design the 41st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design 2022
K-SpecPart: Supervised Embedding Algorithms and Cut Overlay for Improved Hypergraph Partitioning Ismail Bustany Andrew B Kahng Ioannis Koutis Bodhisatta Pramanik Zhiang Wang IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 2023. 2023
PaToH (Partitioning Tool for Hypergraphs) V Ümit Cevdet Çatalyürek Aykanat 2011
Multiway partitioning with pairwise movement Jason Cong Sung Kyu Lim Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE/ACM international conference on Computer-aided design the 1998 IEEE/ACM international conference on Computer-aided design 1998
Hypergraph partitioning for multiple communication cost metrics: Model and methods Mehmet Deveci Kamer Kaya Bora Uçar Ümit V Çatalyürek J. Parallel and Distrib. Comput 77 2015. 2015
A linear-time heuristic for improving network partitions M Charles Robert M Fiduccia Mattheyses Papers on Twenty-five years of electronic design automation 1988
Computers and intractability: A guide to the theory of NP-completeness S David Michael R Johnson Garey 1979 WH Freeman
Multilevel hypergraph partitioning: Applications in VLSI domain George Karypis Rajat Aggarwal Vipin Kumar Shashi Shekhar IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 7 1 1999. 1999
A fast and high quality multilevel scheme for partitioning irregular graphs George Karypis Vipin Kumar SIAM Journal on scientific Computing 20 1 1998. 1998
Multilevel k-way hypergraph partitioning George Karypis Vipin Kumar Proceedings of the 36th annual ACM/IEEE design automation conference the 36th annual ACM/IEEE design automation conference 1999
Combinatorial algorithms for integrated circuit layout Thomas Lengauer 2012 Springer Science & Business Media
High quality hypergraph partitioning for logic emulation Benzheng Li Zhongdong Qi Zhengguang Tang Xiyi He Hailong You Integration 83 2022. 2022
An Efficient Hypergraph Partitioner under Inter-Block Interconnection Constraints Benzheng Li Hailong You Shunyang Bi Yuming Zhang 2024 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) IEEE 2024
Titan: Enabling large and complex benchmarks in academic CAD Kevin E Murray Scott Whitty Suya Liu Jason Luu Vaughn Betz 2013 23rd International Conference on Field programmable Logic and Applications IEEE 2013
High-quality hypergraph partitioning Sebastian Schlag Tobias Heuer Lars Gottesbüren Yaroslav Akhremtsev Christian Schulz Peter Sanders ACM Journal of Experimental Algorithmics 27 2023. 2023
Multiobjective hypergraph-partitioning algorithms for cut and maximum subdomain-degree minimization Navaratnasothie Selvakkumaran George Karypis IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 25 3 2006. 2006
CAD contest: System-level FPGA routing with timing division multiplexing technique Yu-Hsuan Su Richard Sun Pei-Hsin Ho IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD) IEEE 2019. 2019. 2019
Par k way 2.0: A Parallel Multilevel Hypergraph Partitioning Tool Aleksandar Trifunovic William J Knottenbelt International Symposium on Computer and Information Sciences Springer 2004
SPARK: A Scalable Partitioning and Routing Framework for Multi-FPGA Systems Xinshi Zang Evangeline Fy Young Martin Df Wong Proceedings of the Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI the Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI 2023. 2023
Topopart: a multi-level topology-driven partitioning framework for multi-fpga systems Dan Zheng Xinshi Zang Martin Df Wong IEEE/ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design (ICCAD). IEEE 2021. 2021
Time-division multiplexing based system-level FPGA routing for logic verification Peng Zou Zhifeng Lin Xiao Shi Yingjie Wu Jianli Chen Jun Yu Yao-Wen Chang 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) IEEE 2020
